What the Junk?: Lumberjanes and Explicitness

I was gonna write a post all about how wonderful it was that a major theme in *Lumberjanes* is friendship. But then, I thought about it and I might still write a little about that; but what's really great about *Lumberjanes* to me is that it is just zany. Things fly in out of nowhere, plot lines are abrupt, and a reader never really knows "what the junk" to expect. There's an energy to *Lumberjanes'* narrative that I don't see in a lot of the comics I read on a regular basis and that's the greatest thing about *Lumbrjanes*: it is explicitly irreverent. It's an irreverence lost on many popular titles and even some independent ones that labour under established contexts and narrative unfolding. 

PIC-03

Frequently, the characters comment on the strangeness of their own storylines: "This is so weird." The confirmation of the narrative twists don't appear make sense to the characters either. Even when representing a group of male campers, the comic doesn't turn from blatantly putting the boys in the position of subservience without commentary. When confronted by their male camp leader, who announces that "Cookies are for the weak. Real men should be splitting wood and smoking pipes," the scouting lad replies, "but I LIKE baking cookies..." 

PIC-02

This transgression from manhood for the scouting lads isn't something that the *Lumberjanes* take notice of. Instead, there are questions of their trustworthiness, soon overlooked, and their sudden appearance raises suspicions. But otherwise, the scouting lads ably take on the role of neat and tidy distractions while the *Lumberjanes* go out and pursue adventure.  What's different here is that the highlight is not the friendship of the scouting lads that is threatened by the presence of a monstrous overlord. When the scouting lads turn into something less appetizing, the *Lumberjanes* actually discuss ways to help them return to "normal." The important point here is that the normal they're speaking to isn't the normative behaviour we come to see when representing boyhood--which is all cornpipes and splitwood.



I don't want to oversell things here, but the explicit irreverence of *Lumberjanes* makes the established tropes of the comicbook, steeped in the tea of masculinity as they are, seem impotent and stale. That these stale and impotent tropes give way to the explicit commentary of a group of awesome ladies on a quest (another established narrative thwarted) makes *Lumberjanes* feel fresh and lively, where the Hulk feels like a green hunk of stale cheese. 

Undoubtably one of the central themes of *Lumberjanes*, particularly the first eight issues is friendship. What makes *Lumberjane*'s representation of friendship a little different--a little more fresh--is that its stories are, notably, more explicit in their foregrounding of friendship than we have come to expect in comics. Of course, superhero comics, particularly their tandems--*Avengers*, *Justice League*, *That Canadian One that Brenna Likes and I Loathe*, *X-Men*, *Fantastic Four*, *Batman and Robin*, rely to some extent on an implied friendship among members of the team. Teamwork, and the friendship implied by it, is usually a subtext of most superhero narratives, but it is rarely made explicit in quite the same way as *Lumberjanes* represents it. 

The frequent maxim of "friendship to the max" makes the role of friendship explicit where it is not in others. Friendship bracelets save the *Lumberjanes* from dinosaurs and even form the riding gear for Ripley's riding of another. Even the three musketeers didn't declare friendships like the *Lumberjanes* do. All that said, the embedded intricacies of standing narratives of comics linger and their presence in *Lumberjanes* suggests that it is difficult to get away from patriarchal storylines. In issue #8, Jo turns to stone (Diane working as literal representation of Medusa, who laughs). She then becomes the damsel in distress for other Lumberjanes to rescue. What turns it for me is that a kiss, a deciphered code of "your friends will be there for you," and then the further declaration of "friendship to the max" are the stages the yield Jo's freedom. No big fights, no genius reveal, no clutsy criminal monologuing their way into idiocy. Just a statement about the power of friendship and sticking together born out of a kiss on the cheek.  

PIC of This

Whether it's referencing Juliette Gordon Low or subverting traditional camping metaphors--particularly those around Girl Scouts and Boy Scouts (cookies anyone?), *Lumberjanes* is explicit where narratives of such subject matter are steeped in underlying symbolism. *Lumberjanes* is delightfully surface and, if you'll pardon the mixed metaphor, subversively so. The comic manages to plow forward in a state of liminality that makes its frequent gestures toward universal themes such as friendship and encouragement seem delightfully vibrant and timely.   

